C8-L4-review dbt cloud job demo

In this video, I'm going to show you how to review your jobs. You can see all of the jobs you've run by going to the Deploy drop down menu up here and selecting Run History.

Here, I have a list of all the jobs that I've run. If I click on one, I'll click on the first one, then I can see more details about what happened when the job was executed.

We can take a look at some of the run steps here, and the first three are automatic for all jobs in dbtCloud.

The first one is cloning the Git repository.

By default, this will be your main branch. Next is connecting to your warehouse with whatever connection profile you specified in the environment this job is running in And last is invoking dbt deps, which will install all of your packages if you have any Next is everything that you specified.

For example, I made sure to run a source freshness, which we can see failed and gave us a warning because we had two models without any fresh data.

After that, it ran our dbt build, which we can see, was successful with one error.

And that error was we failed an accepted values test. Clicking on any of these individual execution steps will allow us to see what happened in them.

I clicked on my dbt build drop down menu. We can see that it built out again all of our models, tested all of our models, and we can also see exactly where it failed. In general, clicking on these logs is something that you're going to want to do anytime there's any unexpected failure that happens in your run. Down here, you can see that I invoked dbt docs generate.

If I scroll up, we can see even more information about when this job ran. We can see how long this job spent in queue, the amount of time it took to run each individual step, and the total amount of time that this run took.

We also have this really great lineage tab, which shows you your lineage, and this really great model timing tab, which will show you how long each model took to build. Models that take a very long time to build are potential warning signs that you need to refactor your project. Nothing here took too long to build, though, so I don't have too much to be worried about.

If I can highlight down here, you see I just zoomed in on these sections here. I can move this little box around.

I can elongate it, shorten it if I want to.

And that way, you can make sure you're looking at whatever part of your project you wanna be looking at. If I click on the sources tab up here, this will take me to a site where I can see the source freshness of each of my sources. I can click on the drop down menus here, and I can see where I had some stale data. If I go back to just our overview, we can also see how our run was scheduled.

Here it says trigger, and then it says triggered manually. That's because I triggered this job manually.

We also have our commit SHA and the environment that this job ran in.

I also have this button here that I can click to view the documentation that I generated on my run.

If I go back to our model timing tab, if I highlight a model, I can click view and explore. Dbt explorer is an enterprise plan only feature that lets you generate and view the full picture of your project all in one place. I'll click this now.

It brought us to the lineage for the model stage customers.

That was the model I was hovering over.

If I wanted to see how my jobs are running, I can go to this performance button right here. Now I can see how many times my models have been executed, the longest they've taken to execute, and my most failed models.
