C7-L5-documenting sources demo

Let's add descriptions to our sources. So previously, we added documentation to our models and some columns in those models. We can also document at the source level. So let's pop into our sources.

Yml file, and here we can document from one layer above our source tables at the source level. So here, JavaShop is our source name, and that is going to represent our database and our schema. So I'm going to indicate some information about my database my schema. So this is going to have a description again here, and this is going to be a clone of a Postgres application database.

Perfect.

So we have a description at the source level. We can also add descriptions at the individual source table level. So underneath customers here, we'll go ahead and add a description.

And here, I'm going to indicate that this is raw customer data.

It's important to add raw here because that indicates to all of my other developers that this is untransformed data. So let's go ahead and do the same thing under our orders table, and we'll say a raw orders data.

Excellent. So not only can we document at the overall source level and the source table level, we can also document at the column level. So here, let's go ahead and add a column to our customer source in the YAML file. So here we'll put columns, name, and then ID.

Note that I'm putting ID here and not customer ID.

So if I look at my stage, JavaScript customers file, I can see that the original column was called ID, and we renamed that to customer ID. So in my YAML file, when I'm referencing that column, I need to make sure that it's the original source column.

So here, we'll put a description, and here, our ID is going to be the primary key for customers data.

Excellent. Let's go ahead and save our file here and commit and sync our changes. So we added descriptions to Jaffle shop sources.

And so now we successfully added descriptions at the source level, at the source table level, and the column level in our sources.
