C6-L6-testing sources demo



In addition to testing the models in our project, we can also apply the dbt data testing framework directly to our source data.

While applying data tests to our models helps us understand whether the assertions we make about our models are true, applying data tests directly to our sources can give us confidence that the raw data we're building on conforms to our expectations as well.

Data tests on sources are configured exactly the same way that data tests are applied to models.

We can do that either in the YAML configuration files where we declared the sources like here or in custom SQL files in our test directory in our project over here.

For now I'm going to apply a couple primary key data tests in our source YAML file where we declared our Jaffle Shop data sources.

So that's over here in src_jaffle_shop.yml

On both the customers and the orders tables, I'm going to add the primary key data tests for the ID column in each as they should both be unique and not_null.

Let's go ahead and add the columns block here underneath the customers table key.

The name of that column that we want to test is ID.

Then we want to add the data tests unique and not_null

That's because the ID column is the primary key for this customer's table in our jaffle shop source.

Let's do the same thing for our orders table.

Let's actually just copy this right underneath the orders block here.

Great. Now we have added both of our primary key data tests to our sources.

To see if these data tests were applied correctly, let's pull up the command bar here.

To try out these specific source data tests, I'm going to run the command dbt test dash dash select source to indicate that we're testing sources.

Then I'll add a colon and then my source name, which in this case is jaffle_shop

Let's hit enter here. And while that's running, just so you see the source name, it is on line four.

Okay. So we see four data tests here, and they've all passed.

Let's take one more look in the details here.

This data test is making sure that our customer ID is not_null.

We can click on the details and we can see that the SQL looks just as we would expect.

The SQL is finding every record where the ID is null and counting the number of records there. It didn't find any so our not_null data test has passed on our source. Awesome.
