C4-L7-naming conventions explainer

I'm gonna take a moment just to go over the naming conventions for some of the models that you'll see throughout this course.

So the first of those is sources. Sources aren't actually models. They're ways of referencing the raw tables that exist in your data warehouse.

The data there should be loaded in with some off the shelf tool like a Fivetran or Stitch or through some manual orchestration by your data team.

Then there's staging models.

Staging models should be built one to one with the underlying source tables.

These are very light touch computations that just maybe rename a column or maybe do a quick conversion of a particular number so that the data is what what you want it to be. Maybe it's from like inches to feet or something like that.

Then there's intermediate models.

Intermediate models exist somewhere between staging and then the rest of your final tables.

So you may want to hide your intermediate tables from final users and only let your data team see those. That may be something up to you. But these should always reference your staging models. It should never reference directly to your source tables because you wanna use the data that you've already transformed and shaped into the way that you want it to be.

Then coming off of intermediate models, if you have them, that's where we start building things like a fact model. So a fact model is gonna be a pretty skinny table, very long table that represents things that are occurring or have already occurred. So that might be orders, events, clicks, things that are gonna keep happening over time.

Then there's also dimension models, which are going to represent things that exist or things that are, like a person, place, or thing. So these are typically gonna be like customers, users, things that aren't gonna change that much but may change a little bit, like an email might change. That would be a good example of a dimension model.

So now if we look at a quick image of all this together, this is the DAG for the project that we're building towards. On the left side, you will see in green, those are our sources and we're gonna configure those in a later module, but those are our sources.

Building off of those, we see our staging models and those are going to shape the data just a little bit to make it look as we want it to look.

Building off that those staging models, we see that we have a fact orders model where we are bringing together some data to represent our orders, and then we can maybe query that with the BI tool. And then finally, we're actually reusing orders to build into a final dim customers model, and that's also bringing data from our stage customers model. So by building modularly like this, we can reuse things as we need and then just to really clarify fact versus dimension.

Here we have a fact table called orders and that's something that's happening over time. So every time a single customer does another order or maybe a subscription kicks off, another purchase, we're going to have another row in that table for orders. That's a fact table. Then for dim customers, that's a dimension table, because customers, once they're once they're once they exist, their entity isn't really gonna change. But they may have a changing email address or changing phone number or maybe somebody changes their last name for some reason.

But in summary, those are the five naming conventions that you'll see throughout this course. Again, they are sources, staging, intermediate, fact, and dimension.
