C1-L1-meet your instructor

Hi there. My name's Kyle. I'm the director of training here at dbt Labs. I'm really glad you're here to continue your learning journey, leveling up with dbt fundamentals.

I first discovered dbt in a former career as a high school math teacher. I was in charge of a lot of the reporting to make sure our seniors were on track to graduate. And so what I was originally doing was exporting a lot of CSVs from different systems, putting together some very hacky Jupyter notebooks and then uploading that data to a Google sheet, and teachers would look at that Google sheet too, to figure out who needed some more coaching and things like that on the path to graduation.

But then I discovered DBT and just totally streamlined my workflow. I went from every Wednesday morning doing a very manual process for thirty five minutes of that exporting CSVs, running Jupyter notebooks, making sure the Google Sheet looked good, to just running a single command, each morning, when we needed to refresh the reports. Very, very simple.

You'll learn more about that throughout this course. And so just personally really leveled up my own career, my own data workflow, I'm excited for you to hopefully experience something very similar.

Let's jump into the course. Course covers, five key topics They are sources, models, tests, docs, and deployment. This is the real basis of the DV development workflow, and then deployment will show you how to run all your transformations on a schedule. And so as you jump into the course, you'll notice we have some very specific pedagogy in how we teach, and just want you to know what to expect. First, you'll have explainers, where we outline concepts kind of teach some of the software engineering best practices that we're bringing to the data workflow.

Then we also have demos where we're showing off how a particular functionality and dbt works, and then a really important proponent that the team believes in is that you have a chance to get hands on keyboards in this course. So we'll have a practice section or a lab section where you can actually take DBT for a spin, try replicating what we showed you in the demo, maybe try some stretch exercises, but then we want you to be supported. We'll also provide an exemplar for you to check your work.

At the very end, we want to check your understanding, so we have a very quick quiz, on each section, just to make sure you're checking your progress throughout the the learning. And then finally, we have a quick review section. If you just need a quick recap of what was covered in that particular chapter.

And so it's broken into a few different chapters.

As I've outlined before, and the quizzes, this is a low stakes course.

It's not gonna passfail or anything like that. You can take the quizzes as many times as you would like. To once you get through the whole course, pass each of the quizzes, then at the end, you'll be issued a DV fundamentals badge. Feel free to, put that on LinkedIn if you want to show it off.

And so I'll get out of your way shortly, but, we'll love to hear your feedback on the course at the very end or on LinkedIn or reach out to us in dbt community slack. We take our teaching craft very seriously here on the training team. So let us know, and I'll I'll step aside and let you learn from myself and the rest of the team. Thanks.
