C5-L4-source freshness demo

We have declared our sources, and we're able to use the sources function to help define our lineage in our DAG.

Let's see what else we can do now that we have our sources declared.

In our docs, we also see that we can calculate the freshness of our source data. Let's read a little bit more about that.

To do this, we need to add a freshness block and a loaded at field in our table.

And this is what the syntax looks like.

I would like to understand what these things mean, under freshness, what is count, what is period looks like, some time. Are those the only options? And then what is, the requirements of the lead polluted at field? This is where our docs are useful.

I go to my docs.

Let me search for freshness.

There we go.

And, again, we have the templates of the schema.

Let's see if we can find okay. Loaded at, a column name or expression that returns a time stamp indicating freshness.

K. So it seems we need to have a column in our data that is a time stamp.

And then count, okay, positive number, integer for the number of periods where a data source is considered fresh. And then period, it can be minute, hour, or day. So I understand what the expectations are.

Let's see which field in our data we can apply this to.

So in Snowflake, when we go to raw, let's check out our objects, JAFL shop.

So customers.

When we look at our columns, we do not have any column that is a time stamp type. Okay.

What about orders?

Okay. We do. So we can apply this to our orders object.

Let's go back and let's copy this.

Alright.

Go back here under orders.

Put it in. I remember we needed to add a loaded at field.

So let's grab that.

Wonder why they're doing this also at the top.

Let's try this first.

Okay. Let's save.

And now to apply this, let's see.

We can use the dbt source freshness command. Alright.

So dbt source freshness.

It failed on orders.

Let's see why it did that.

So telling us that it's an error. Let's read our error declaration again.

It's saying one as after a six hour period and error after a twelve hour period. Let's go into our column data, orders.

It is currently seven thirty where I am, and this was last on the eighth. And this was last, refreshed or loaded at six thirty the previous day.

So today is the ninth. This was loaded on the eighth. So according to what we've defined, this will definitely throw an error. Let us increase this, the counts to maybe twenty four hours. Save.

Run this again, the v t source freshness.

Okay. It's been successful, and it's throwing a warning.

And it's basically telling us that it's been over six hours, and this is what we expected.

You have the option to use other period fields. So I can make this one day.

Or and I can make this a little bit higher.

I can say twenty four hours.

Let's see. This should not throw any error or give us any warning. So I don't wanna see any error. Everything should be green, and we see that is what happens.

Great.

But what was it that they were doing over here? What if I want to apply, this freshness to multiple objects or tables? Do I have to do it individually?

It doesn't seem so. You can apply that at the schema level.

So let's copy that.

Let's copy this information that we have from here.

And then under schema.

Apply this.

Okay.

Let's save.

We're getting something failing in customers.

So let's look at that.

And it's saying invalid identifier, e t l loaded at.

This makes sense. It is telling us that there is no time stamp field called ETL loaded at that it can use on the customers table. And remember, we saw this when we looked at our data, our columns in Snowflake.

So what do we do then? Does it mean that we can't apply this at a schema level?

You still can. You just have to make a change to the specific table that you cannot apply this to.

And if you check out your docs, you see that you can declare freshness under the specific table as null.

So let's see that.

Save.

And we run this again, and we see that the configuration has only been applied to the orders, object and skipped the customers. So everything is successful.

There's so much more that you can read about in the docs.

Check out these related reference documents at the top. But, yes, that is source freshness.
