C3-L7-ovrvw dbt cloud ui demo

Hey everyone. We're going to jump into the dbt Cloud UI here, just so you have some orientation to where things are, where to go, where to find them as you navigate the rest of this course. So on the left-hand side, you should see this navigation. I'm going to keep it popped open for this, but you can also, if you'd like to keep your screen real estate, you can keep it nice and collapsed like that.

I'll expand it like this. And down here, you'll see this little kind of like work building logo and you can choose your account. I'm currently working in Coap Sandbox. This is my sandbox account.

And I could toggle into other projects if I. Opened this up here. So make sure you're working in whatever account you want to use for this particular course. Once I have that, you can then select a project.

You may have already set one of these up and you might have multiple projects over time, depending on what type of account you're using. And so I am going to focus on analytics here. And so I'll already see, I'm brought into this dashboard here. I don't have much going on with this project at the moment, but once I do have it up and running things, running on a schedule, refreshing my pipelines.

I will get to see some high level information about how my data pipelines are running, powered by dbt. On the left-hand side, there are three kind of key motions or key areas of the product that you want to jump into. So first being develop. There are three ways to develop in dbt right now there's cloud IDE cloud CLI and visual editor.

And this course we're going to focus on cloud IDE. And you'll notice if I open that up, I actually land directly in the development environment for this particular project. So if I jump back. In a future course or a future time, you can check out these other options for development.

And once you've done a bunch of development merged things to main you can then run your data pipelines built in dbt on a schedule using the deploy function here. This allows you to set up environments and within environments, you can run jobs, which is effectively running your project on a schedule. And then you can review the run history from each of those jobs. So this is a cascading effect here.

Environments have jobs have run history. And once you've done that and run your first production run. You can navigate to explore which we'll show you. A very high level view of your project.

So you can see how models depend on each other see your full lineage look at documentation and things like that. So you will likely spend most of your time as a dbt developer in develop, deploy, or explore. Great. So we'll jump into each of those throughout the course.

So you're familiar with them, but just wanted to give you some orientation to those. As you are working through the course, you might need to investigate a few different things like connections, or just want to know where the account settings are. Those again are here under account settings. Anything under settings here is account wide.

So if I'm working in an account with someone else, These will change things for both of us. Whereas your profile, these are specific to you as a developer. So if I click credentials, click on analytics, I will see my credentials here for development. And then finally, if you're interested in notifications, you can have email and slack notifications as well.

And so that is your account settings. And a few more things just to get you oriented. For helping guides, lots of things to support you getting started. If you're watching this video, you're probably already in dbt learn.

We also have our product docs, slack community, and our community forum as well. If you need to reach out to support or check the status of dbt Cloud, you can check the status page, see release notes, create a support ticket. Let us know how we can support. And then finally, as I wrap this up let us know what you think.

If there's a part of the product we're doing really well. Grab a screenshot and write us a note. There's something we can improve. We want to hear from you.

So definitely just fill this out add a screenshot that helps us know what you're talking about. And then if you'd like us to connect with you. You. can check this box.

As well. And so with that, you have a full tour of the dbt cloud UI.
